---
title: "Coffee, Donuts, and Möbius strips"
date: 2020-04-22
author: Sanjay Yepuri
---

Let’s walk through some of the ideas that cause topologists to have an existential crisis every morning.
$a + b = c$

### Lines, Segments, and Polygons
Before, we can make sense of coffee cups and donuts, let’s take a look at same basic objects and what they look like in topology.

We know that in $\mathbb{R}^2$, the x-y coordinate plane, we can define a line using two points $p,q \in \mathbb{R}^2$. The set of points on this line is given by
> $$pq = \{ p + t(q - p) \mid t \in \mathbb{R} \}$$

This expression computes each point on the line by starting from $p$ and then moving in the direction of the the vector $q-p$ by a factor of $t$. Try plugging in different values of $t$ and see where on the line you end up.

Now we can define the line segment between $p$ and $q$ as
> $$\overline{pq} = \{ p + t(q - p) \mid t \in [0, 1] \}$$

When we set $t$ to $0$ we get $p$ and when $t = 1$ we get $q$. For every value of $t$ in between, we will get a point on the line segment. Note that we are defining an _orientation_ of the line segment by selecting $p$ as the starting point. There is no reason that $q$ cannot be the starting point; by selecting this convention, the oriented segment will be $\overline{qp}$.

A _polygon_, $P$, is defined by points $p_0, p_1, p_2, ... p_n \in \mathbb{R}^2$ such that $n \ge 3$, $p_0 = p_n$, and no two line segments between the points intersect except possibly at the endpoints.

Now if this may seem like a lot of notation (btw it is), just remember that we are just redefining what we already know. Our intuition about triangles, rectangles, etc. still hold given these mathematical definitions.

### Möbius Strips?
Polygons by themselves are pretty boring; to spice things let's start bending them into new objects. To keep things simple, we will use a square. Take the edge $\overline{p_0p_1}$ and _glue_ it $\overline{p_3p_2}$. By glueing the line segments using these orientations we get a cylinder.

Now suppose we glue $\overline{p_0p_1}$ and $\overline{p_2p_3}$. We get the mobius strip - A one sided surface.

What happens when we glue two pairs of line segments together? By gluing $\overline{p_0q_1}$ and $\overline{p_3p_2}$ as well as $\overline{p_1p_2}$ and $\overline{p_4p_3}$ we get a torus a.k.a the donut.

### The Machinery
